---
layout: post
title:  "Lesson 1 - Basic Swift"
date:   2018-09-02
published: false
---
Notes Taken by Will Oakley and Shubham Gupta

## Variables

Swift has two types of basic containers for data. Variables (denoted by the ``var`` keyword) can contain mutable data, meaning that it can change over the course of your program's runtime. Constants (denoted by the ``let`` keyword) are set upon initialization and cannot be changed once they are set.

Variables types in swift are __inferred__. This means that it is not required to assign a type, as you have to in languages like C or Java. For example if you declare a variable like this:

``var aNumber = 100``

`aNumber` will forever be of type _Int_.

### Optionals

Optionals (denoted with a ?) are a special type of variable in Swift. Normally, variables cannot be assigned to _nil_. Optionals allow this to happen. For example if we declare some variables like this:

``var aFloat: Float?``

``var aDouble: Double!``

`aFloat` can contain `nil` while `aDouble` must keep a value once it is assigned.

Optionals can be "force unwrapped" (the value will be "force read") by adding a !.

__Note:__ Xcode will frequently propose unwrapping an optional to fix a variety of common issues. _This is usually not the best way to fix a problem!!_ Make sure you consider what is causing an error before you use Xcode's auto-solver.

We can avoid these force unwrap issues by using something like an `if let` statement. The structure is as follows:

```
var optionalName: String? = "John Appleseed"
if let name = optionalName {
    print("Hello, \(name)")
}
```
In this example, "Hello, John Appleseed" will only be printed if `optionalName` is not null. In this case, it is assigned to "John Appleseed," so therefore it will be printed. If we were to assign `optionalName` to `nil`, nothing will be printed and the program continue on without crashing.

## Functions

Functions in Swift are structured in a very clear format. A basic function signature will follow the structure as follows:

`func lookAtThis(number: Int) -> String`

This is a function called "lookAtThis" with a single argument "number" of type `Int`. It will return a variable of type `String`.

Functions can have as many arguments as you would like. Usually the argument label is required when you call the function unless you prefix it with an _ when it is declared.

## Arrays & Dictionaries

Arrays syntax in swift is very similar to other languages. An array of numbers could be declared like this:

`let oddNumbers = [1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15]`

Again, similarly to other programming languages, the syntax for accessing elements of the array is very simple. Just use something like `oddNumbers[2]` to get the 3rd element in the array (in this case that would be 5).

Dictionaries are ways of storing data indexed by string keys. They are declared like this:

```
var interestingNumbers = ["primes": [2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17],
                          "triangular": [1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28],
                          "hexagonal": [1, 6, 15, 28, 45, 66, 91]]
```

If we wanted to access the array "primes", we would use the statement `interestingNumbers["primes"]`, because the "primes" array is stored under the key "primes".


## Control

While statements are the same as any other programming language. They are used as such:
```
while aBoolean{
  // do something
}
```

This while loop will continuously run until `aBoolean` becomes false.


For loops take on a slightly unique syntax in Swift. An example for loop is as follows:
```
for uni in universities{
  //do something with uni
}
```
This for loop will iterate over every element in the list `universities`.

Lets say we want to iterate over a range of numbers instead. We would this syntax to do so:
```
for n in 1...5 {
    print(n)
}
```

This will print out `1 2 3 4 5`. Note that this is inclusive of the number `5`. If we want to iterate up to, but not including 5, we would write it as below:
```
for n in 1..<5 {
    print(n)
}
```
This will print out `1 2 3 4`.

## Extensions
Extensions are used to add new functionality to an existing class, structure, enumeration, or protocol type. Basically it allows you to "extend" the functionality of basic Swift types. This is also useful to clean up your code and modularize your project into smaller files.

```
extension String {

    subscript (r: Range<Int> ) -> String {
        *** YOUR CODE HERE ***
    }
```

Doing so, we have extended the String class and added to its functionality.

## Xcode Tutorial

When creating a new Xcode project here are some things to note:

 * Select Single View Application
 * Change the Display name of the application to your app's desired name.
 * Where it asks for your Team, just leave it at none.
 
After creating your project and saving it to a proper destination. You should see your project open up and a blank ViewController on your screen. This screen is known as the storyboard and you can refer back to it from the left hand panel by clicking ```Main.storyboard```.

MDB's general practice does not use the storyboard, instead for UI, we use programmatic UI. 

Here is the excerpt from the example file you may have seen in lecture with some descriptions:
```
import UIKit

class MainViewController: UIViewController {
    
   // declares a UILabel named selectCoinLabel
   var selectCoinLabel: UILabel!
   
   //declares an imageView named headsImageView 
   var headsImageView : UIImageView!
    
    
    override func viewDidLoad() {
        super.viewDidLoad()
        
        //sets the dimensions of our UILabel to the specified frame 
        //You can access the width and height of the screen using view.frame.width and view.frame.height respectively!
        selectCoinLabel = UILabel(frame: CGRect(x:10, y:10, width: view.frame.width, height: 50))
        
        //changes the text of our UILabel to say our specified text
        selectCoinLabel.text = "Pick heads or tails!"
        
        //centers our text within the dimensions of our UILabel
        selectCoinLabel.textAlignment = .center
        
        //Adds our UILabel to your main view
        view.addSubview(selectCoinLabel)
        
        headsImageView = UIImageView(frame: CGRect(x: 0, y:0, width: view.frame.width, height: view.frame.height / 3))
        
        //centers our image view around the specified point
        //Use this to center your UI elements!
        headsImageView.center = CGPoint(x: view.frame.height / 2, y: view.frame.height / 3)
        
        //assigns the UIImageView's image to be the "heads" image located in your Assets.xcassets folder!
        headsImageView.image = UIImage(named: "heads")
        
        //Makes sure the aspect ratio of our images stay the same. Basically makes images look prettier!
        headsImageView.contentMode = .scaleAspectFit
        
        view.addSubview(headsImageView)
        
        headsButton = UIButton(frame: CGRect(...))
        
        //Sets the text of our button to "Heads"
        headsButton.setTitle("Heads", for: .normal)
        
        //Specifies to Xcode to call the headsClicked function upon clicking the headsButton
        headsButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(headsClicked), for .touchUpInside)
        
        @objc func headsClicked() {
            *** Some functionality here***
        }
        
    }
}
```

Some Important notes about images: 

   * In order to use any images in our application, make sure to add the images you desire to the Assets.xcassets folder in your Xcode Project. Make sure you do this for your first project!
   * UIImageView is the "frame" for your image whereas the UIImage is the actual image
   * Assign an UIImage to the UIImageView view the ```.image``` property
   * Unsquish your images by setting the ```contentMode``` property of an UIImageView to ```.scaleAspectFit```

## Multiple View Controllers

You can add ViewControllers to your project by dragging it out of your tools panel at the bottom right hand side of Xcode. This is one of the few times you will be interacting with the storyboard!

Connect ViewControllers by CTRL clicking the yellow leftmost button at the top of the view controller and dragging the cursor to the second view controller. 

Make sure you define both ViewControllers to specific classes in order to connect them with your code. 
Since we ran out of time in our lesson here are some readings to do about Segues! Segues are tools that allow us to move and transfer information from one view controller to the other.

https://teamtreehouse.com/community/segueing-to-other-view-controller-programmatically-reassigning-values-from-other-classes

Some other things that could come into handy for MP1:
    * Unwind Segues
    * Prepare for segue
    * Navigation Controllers






